if you decide okay so if religion is can
be good for my mental health but like
what if i'm not religious does that mean
i mean i need to become religious i'd
say absolutely not you do not need to
become religious
if you are you know not religiously
inclined then here are the things that
you should do all right
so parents blame mental health problems
on lack of religious faith so hello hg
community and thank you for being an
open place to discuss things good job
everyone at hg
for as long as i remember i have had
problems with my mental health it has
been especially hard during the time
where i have been away from parents to
complete studies whenever i try to have
this conversation with my parents on my
declining mental health my parents
especially my father makes it a point
that this decline has been in large part
due to me not taking my religion
seriously islam
and i should just pray and be more pious
now i understand where he's coming from
he was born during a time of war and
revolution in my country of origin and
he got to where he is despite those
circumstances through a strong spiritual
faith as a result whenever he says this
to me instead of feeling better i just
feel ashamed and guilty because i'm not
pious or mentally strong
as he is
i do admit i have some doubts and
negative feelings towards my religion
and have not been practicing my faith
much because it brings about a pain a
lot of painful memories because in my
country it was used as a tool of control
and oppression
i still don't know where i stand
regarding religion
in large part because i feel like i have
not had the time to explore what it
means to to me and to separate it from
the negative ways it's been used to
control and make people miserable
how should i reignite the threat of
discussion with my parents in a fruitful
way
sorry for the long post and thank you
for reading if you did
okay
so i think this is a really really
important post
um and there are a couple of things that
i want to start with which are actually
disclaimers of sort and just like
setting some ground rules so i
understand that religion can be quite a
divisive topic right so we touched on
one or two of those back in 2021 and i
guess we haven't learned our lesson yet
so here we go
so we're going to talk a little bit
about religion and mental health today
i want to lay out a couple of
disclaimers so the first is that i'm not
an expert on religion i'm not a
religious scholar i don't really know
you know
it's not my field of expertise
uh that being said i have spent a lot of
time exploring religion so i grew up
going to a catholic school i'm pretty
familiar with christianity and
catholicism
you know and then also like went through
my own journey i grew up hindu
but was basically agnostic or atheistic
for like most of my life
are not most now because i'm older and
then sort of rediscovered a a love for
karmic religions for lack of a better
term so this sort of includes hinduism
buddhism jainism
um eastern religions is another way to
put out once i understood what they were
actually saying
and so there may be a bias there because
i have you know explored a lot of
different religions and sort of decided
on a particular spiritual path which
suits me so apologies if it comes across
as biased in that way
and the last thing is that i think that
this is the reason i'm sort of bringing
it up is because i think that this is an
important thing to talk about because a
lot of the world is religious and what's
the relationship between religion and
mental health so i'd like to approach
this in the way that we do at other
things at hg which is like let's just
kind of like look at it pretty
critically and analytically and try to
understand does religion have a positive
impact on mental health negative impact
on mental health and if it does have a
positive or negative impact what are the
reasons for that what are the mechanisms
for it
and so i think what we'll sort of
discover is actually pretty cool okay
so the first thing that we're going to
talk about
is i know it sounds kind of weird before
we get into religion
what
improves
mental health
okay so there are all kinds of things
that contribute to your mental health
like physical health diet et cetera
but we're what we're going to start by
focusing on
is actually
something called common factors research
so
some time ago there was one form of
essentially psychotherapy
um and that form was psychoanalysis was
discovered by like freud and yung and
those people and then over time
psychoanalysis
became
psychotherapy
or psychodynamic
and then like over time like we had this
group of behaviorists that developed
cognitive behavioral therapy oh no
we're lagging
and then someone who was learned cbt and
psychotherapy learned how to meditate
and they're like hey this is cool
and they developed dialectical
behavioral therapy and i can see that
we're lagging so i'm gonna just
i guess i'm just going to talk
oh no there it goes
okay
and so then what we sort of discovered
is that there's a bunch of different
types of psychotherapy right so like and
they're quite different so uh oh
so cognitive behavioral therapy is very
different from dbt because like this has
a mindfulness component psychodynamic
psychotherapy is similar to
psychoanalysis so it's like quite
different
and so people sat down and they started
to figure out okay like which one of
these is best because they're very
different in one we're talking about
your your your you know your dreams
we're anal we're doing dream analysis
like this is over here
like dream analysis is like quite
different from meditation
which is like quite different from doing
like worksheets
about your feelings
so these are all very different which
one's the best
so as people started to compare
different things
what they sort of discovered is they're
all about the same
and then that got really confusing
because it's like how is like how does
meditation offer the same benefit
as something like dream analysis like
how the hell does that even work like
how can these things essentially
give you the same benefit like that
doesn't make any sense because they're
so different
and so what people sort of started
looking at is something called common
factors research and this ipad thing is
lacking lagging so we're gonna just
go old school lecture style okay
so they looked at common factors
research and essentially what they
figured out is that oh it's not actually
any one of these particular things but
there's a set of common factors that
will determine whether something is
mentally like helps your mental health
or doesn't help your mental health
so there are two or three big things
that they sort of discovered the first
is something called the therapeutic
alliance so you need to have someone
that you can trust and talk to
like that
that can like sort of handle your mental
things you need a consistent trusted
space to go to with your mental health
problems
the second thing that they discovered
was that you need an organizing
framework
so like the good therapists are not
necessarily it's not that cbt is like
more correct than psychoanalysis
or that dbt is more correct than cbt
it's that whoever is like teaching you
the stuff or whoever is offering mental
health support needs to have an
organizing framework that sort of
encompasses everything that we kind of
look at
and so this these were kind of two of
the really big things that they they
kind of discovered
so the interesting thing is that you
know back in the day
we didn't really have like an
appreciation for mental health so like
where did people go with their mental
health problems right so if i feel sad
or i lose a child and i'm going through
the grief process
who do i go to like help me make sense
of that because we've sort of discovered
through research that that's really
important for people who's like where's
like a place that organizes the way that
i view the world and a lens that that
that i can use to understand problems in
myself
and this used to be done through
religion right so like
that's what religion sort of did like if
you lose your kid like who do i turn to
like okay i'm gonna turn to like a
priest right so hopefully there's like a
strong therapeutic alliance there
there's a trusted person who has an
organizing framework that they can use
to like help me
navigate my problems and we even see
this from this particular poster that
this person's dad went through a very
you know tumultuous time in their life
that was not easy and religion sort of
gave them answers gave them a narrative
gave them maybe a trusted space
and so they used those kinds of things
to kind of like navigate their life and
get some kind of mental strength and
fortitude so that sort of makes sense
right so like if you kind of look at it
that way religion sort of touches on a
couple of the parts of common factors
research
okay
so
you know what do we need we need a
therapeutic alliance
and then we need an organizing framework
and in the past this is where we you
know religion used to do these two
things so a couple of other big things
that are very very important
that religion does for us one is it
gives us a sense of community or social
capital
there have been numerous studies that
show that social interactions and social
capital are good for mental health
right so like isolation makes mental
health problems worse
community makes mental health problems
better we have like a shared group of
people that we can like survive with or
process things with right so we see this
a lot for example with like the jewish
diaspora where there's like a very very
strong sense of like community and like
an almost us versus them kind of
mentality which has downsides
but that strong social connection we see
this a lot also amongst like you know
indian diaspora too so like indians and
hindus like we all hang out with each
other right because this is like our
shared culture it's our religion so we
have a strong sense of community at
least where i live
and we kind of all get together and
these have positive impacts on mental
health so religion kind of offers you
know a safe space theoretically
where people you can trust
religion offers definitely offers an
organizing framework right depending on
which religion you believe in stuff like
heaven hell
sin good bad
et cetera like it just gives us lots of
like ways to view the world why does a
bad thing happen to me well because
religion will give you an answer
and i'll say because of this and that it
definitely offers a sense of community
right and then there are two other
things that i think are really really
important that religion offers
one is sublimation of ego
so if you guys watch our streams a lot
you're gonna know that a lot of our
suffering comes from our ego ego isn't
all bad
but religion is essentially like
at least abrahamic religions tend to be
like very sublimating the ego oriented
so a good example of this is alcoholics
anonymous
so this is something i know a little bit
more about which is why i'm going to use
this as an example so alcoholics
anonymous is a very successful on the on
the whole a very successful organization
that helps people
gain sobriety there are some studies
that even suggest that alcoholics
anonymous is the most successful
intervention that someone can do that
will
has the greatest chance of becoming
having someone become sober there are
all kinds of caveats and problems with
that research but there's you can
definitely make the argument
so a big thing
that's kind of bizarre about alcoholics
anonymous is it starts
with the idea that i am powerless
in the face of my addiction
and that's weird
right like you'd think that we'd think
like logically that
you know if you want to overcome a
problem like we want to empower people
right like we want people to be like um
yeah like you can do it like you can you
can kick this habit like you're in
control like you can do it
and so alcoholics anonymous which is
very heavily uh founded by in christian
roots by the way so it's like it's very
religious so they believe in like higher
power and like a lot of christianity
like focus themes and stuff like that
which rubs people the wrong way if you
guys are not really into that refuge
recovery is a very good alternative so
that's like uh
has a lot of like fellowship and
community it was based more on buddhist
principles
so this is kind of weird right because
like alcoholics anonymous and
christianity will sort of say
this this is where i'm like i could be
misspeaking so apologies if i'm
offending people but like there's sort
of this idea that in the abrahamic
religions that god is all-powerful and
like you are not
right like that's a common in the
abrahamic religions is that god can like
do whatever they want to but like you as
a human being you don't have all the
power in the universe which is different
from the karmic religions because the
karmic religions actually sort of say
the opposite or even say that you are
one with god and you are just as
powerful as
divinity is or you are divine so that's
kind of different there
but since the person is kind of coming
from the tradition of islam and we're
you know we'll just use that as an
example so like if you kind of think
about it how is this sort of like ego
sublimation like how can this help with
mental health right
because this is a big part of you know
religion is sublimating your ego and
sort of like teaching you that god is
all-powerful and you are not and all
this kind of good stuff and so
alcoholics anonymous is a good example
of this because a big part of the
addict's brain
is
i can handle this
so when people kind of say this
right like like when your brain says i
can handle the i can handle it i'm in
control
it's this kind of thought
which is essentially coming from the ego
right this is coming from the ahamkara
or ego
and this is the thought that gets you in
trouble
so when you adopt like a sublimation of
the ego kind of attitude it actually
does seem to help in terms of kicking in
addiction there's good data for that and
i suspect that it helps too in terms of
like dealing with suffering right
because we know that ego is associated
with suffering and so we can sort of see
how okay so like if we're sublimating
the ego
you know we're going to decrease our
suffering
and this may in turn improve mental
health
there's also good data behind this as
well so if we look at the outcomes of
meditative practice which will sort of
you know sublimate the ego weaken the
ego and that seems to be correlated with
people like being happier because we
know that meditation improves mental
health
okay so that's another mechanism that
religion uses and the last mechanism
that we're going to talk about is that
religion does actually teach us
discipline of the mind
hopefully
we're going to talk about caveats in a
second so if we think about things like
saying hail mary's right
what we're literally doing is we're like
it's a darn technique so it's focusing
the mind
when we go to church every sunday we're
like sort of disciplining ourselves
because we got to go to church so you
could like you can't be a degenerate
like you got to get to church you got to
like get dressed up and you got to clean
yourself up and this and that right so
when you pray five times a day
that sort of improves your awareness
like you can't lose track of time
because you've got to pray five times a
day so a lot of like religion
has baked into it techniques like prayer
which involve like focusing the mind and
probably have health benefits as a
result
and so this is where things get a little
bit so so a lot of religion has actually
like stuff kind of baked in that results
in disciplining of the mind
so can religion help mental health
there's some studies that actually
suggest that religion and spirituality
actually religion can have positive
effects on mental health there are lots
of downsides to religion and mental
health as well
so for example this person is talking a
little bit about guilt
right so like i don't know where i stand
i feel ashamed and guilty so religion is
not necessarily a blanket or it's not
neces it's in no way
a blanket positive force for mental
health so there's a lot of like abuse of
power there's a lot of shame there's a
lot of guilt there's a lot of betrayal
of trust there's a lot of like bad
things that come out of humility of
religion so when we sublimate the ego
can that improve uh our suffering and
mental health yes but sublimation of the
ego also makes us right to be taken
advantage of
right because if i am like if i'm
powerless in the in the face of whatever
and there's like there's this this
priest is all-powerful and he says do
something then i should do that
right so there are definitely downsides
which can happen with religion
but there is some research that suggests
that religion can have positive impacts
on mental health and as we start to sort
of unpack what is it that religion does
like what are the mechanisms of religion
what we sort of discover is that i
haven't seen anything that suggests that
a particular religion is more correct
and or sorry more beneficial for mental
health than another religion i'm not an
expert in the research by the way
so i think what we can what i would
conclude sort of scientifically is that
it's not a particular religion and
actually this is also influenced by the
studies that i've done because patanjali
says this too so he says that you can
meditate and all this kind of stuff
that's fantastic you can attain
enlightenment that way but you can also
attain enlightenment through devotion
and surrender to god
and the key thing that patanjali doesn't
really explain in a whole lot of detail
because that's not what he talks about
but if you if you really like look at
some of these yogic texts what they say
is that it's not the god part that leads
to enlightenment it's the devotion and
surrender part so the god that you
surrender to doesn't matter it's not
like
this god will give you more spiritual
growth than that god now i recognize
that that is a
contentious statement for a lot of
people who insist that their god is the
better god and that's the one that you
should surrender to but what potentially
sort of said is that he's like the
important part is like the sublimation
of the ego and the devotion to an uh an
object
whether it's a particular god or it's an
ideal or whatever it's the devotion to
the thing that results in the spiritual
growth
and so what we can kind of see if we
sort of unpack religion is that there
are like five things that i think will
contribute to people's mental health
that religion or religious organizations
and religions tend to offer right and
this is where it's kind of like you do
you have to be religious to improve your
mental health absolutely not but i think
the advantage of religion is that it's
kind of like a combo meal right it's
like pre-packaged everything's sort of
set up for you so you kind of get
hopefully these things if you go to a
good religious place without like having
to structure them yourself because if
you don't want to go that route you're
just totally fine
then what i think it's important to do
is if you want to get these benefits
then you have to structure each of these
things yourself
right so you can go and order the combo
meal and you're going to get kind of
everything you need for one meal it's
going to be packaged right there's ups
and downs to that
but if you if you decide okay so if
religion is can be good for my mental
health but like what if i'm not
religious does that mean i mean i need
to become religious i'd say absolutely
not you do not need to become religious
if you are you know not religiously
inclined then here are the things that
you should do
so first
is find a trusted source
so this is where like i think mentorship
is critical here
right this can also be like a therapist
number two
figure out
how the world works
you need an organizing framework
so this is like kind of a tall ask like
this is the advantage of of religion
which is like they just tell you they're
like hey here's how it works we don't
have to believe them you don't have to
trust it whatever but if you're not
going to do that then you need to do the
work to figure out what is the
organizing principle or like what are
the organizing principles that i'm going
to use to make sense of like why crap
happens is it going to be science
is it going to be philosophy
is it going to be spirituality of like a
particular tradition
like meditation
right is it going to be like some kind
of like family cultural kind of thing
so whatever but you need some kind of
organizing framework right
next thing that you're going to need is
community
so if you want to meet people going to
church is a really really easy way to do
it right they're like people they're
generally speaking they tend to be
pretty nice
right so it's like a great form of like
social capital and community and stuff
like that
so if you don't have that you're going
to need to like find a community find
your tribe
number four
is sublimate the ego
so religion once again does it for you i
think sometimes they do it to the
detriment to people right when they
really browbeat you and
treat you with a lot of guilt and shame
i don't think that that's healthy
personally
so you can also get like ptsd and all
kinds of self-worth problems from the
wrong kind of religious interaction
so this too is hard but i think this you
can meditate
for lack of a better term
and then number five is
once again meditation and yoga
so you're going to need to learn like
discipline
and like you know
practices and stuff like that which is
tricky
but you know this is your substitute to
religion and i think what's starting to
happen part of the reason that we're
seeing a decline in religion
is because the things that religion
basically used to be only one that did
this stuff right so like a thousand
years ago like
science wasn't that well developed like
they couldn't really give us answers
about how the world works
um our our community and our tribe was
like tangled up with our religion
the way that we learned discipline and
the way that we learned to sublimate the
ego were like basically all that existed
was the combo meal because we just sort
of had we just didn't have options
and now as we're starting to learn more
about meditation as we're starting to
learn more about community and science
and things like that you don't need to
go to a religion to get the mental
benefits of religion anymore
now this once again is going to be a
bias view because i'm sure there are
going to be people out there who will
say that my religion by virtue of what
it is offers a significant benefit so
specifically like people will say like
you know believing in allah
like will help your depression that's
what this person's dad says
they're going to say that this is
different from believing in jesus that
allah has an effect that jesus does not
have
right so like that that's where some
people will say believing in jesus is
going to have an effect
even hindus will say that but i don't
really think that's what the hindu
religion says
um to the hindu religion part of what i
like about it is that they're sort of
like you can be atheistic and you can be
hindu you can be agnostic and you can be
hindu
it's a little bit more in my mind and
this could be where my bias is i really
don't think so but if you really look at
it objectively like if you look at the
religious texts of hinduism
the oldest religious texts are 25 music
theory
medicine
25 rituals
and 25 creation myths
and so you also have people like
patanjali are like you can believe in
god or like not believe in god
so
even the concept of hinduism is a
religion is sort of like false
like that idea of religion even the word
religion is like a judeo-christian
concept
when people ask
are you hindu like the r-u-a religion is
like a judeo-christian concept right
because the abrahamic religions were the
ones who sort of said there's like us
and not us there's like the people of
israel and there's like the not people
of israel they're like the ones who
believe in christ and like the ones who
don't believe in christ there's like you
know the infidels and the non-infidels
so that fundamental idea of owning to a
religion converting to a religion
believing in a religion that's actually
sort of like a western concept because
it's like how do you convert to buddhism
like you don't really can i mean sure
you can someone somewhere out there will
convert you to buddhism if you want to
they're going to be sex that will
convert people but it's not really like
buddha didn't
you know start like he wasn't saying
like you should believe what i say like
you that's he was just teaching stuff so
the karmic religions are quite different
in that way and that they they're sort
of just a collection of information and
what the karmic religions did they
didn't separate out spirituality from
the other things it's just like if you
go to university you can major in
religion and you can major in
mathematics it's no different it's not
like spirituality is like a different
thing
from science they're actually all
tangled together they're just different
sources of knowledge
and so if you look at for example karma
like karma is just the principle of
cause and fact in effect which is like
you know has physics applications and
has like non-physics applications
um which is why you know you have music
theory and medicine which are part of
the holy books because that's like the
idea of a holy book is also like alien
to hinduism there's like no such thing
as a holy book there's no bible in
hinduism there's like all kinds of texts
and you can sort of believe which one
you want
so it's a little bit more in my opinion
scientific but that that's probably
going to piss a lot of people off
because the idea that i say my religion
is more scientific than your religion is
like seeing you know as like a easy way
to piss people off but i really do think
that you know i i i haven't seen any you
know prescriptions for
malaria in the bible whereas you'll see
that in indian or hindu religious texts
right
yeah so this is the other thing is so
hexahorn is saying religious religion
equal scientific so in in the west we
view those things as like
contrary right we think of like religion
and science is like being on opposite
ends of the spectrum
but especially in the eastern religions
like if you read patanjali it's like
quite scientific like it's critical so
it also encourages you like
brahma sutra for example is like a text
that will teach you logic and will teach
you how to poke holes in arguments so
it's like a text on logic which is
generally considered like a religious
text by people in the west but in the
east it's just it's just
they just taught everything
so when you go to when you went to like
if you became like a monk for example
you had to learn medicine
like it was all part of the same
education so like all religious leaders
like were doctors and were trained in
surgery for example i mean that may not
be fair to say when i'm saying all
because i wasn't there
but it's just different
right so
so in
in short you know can religion have
positive effects on mental health i
think absolutely there's even data to
support that and at the same time it's
not like religion is the only source of
those kinds of things and if we start to
analyze a little bit about okay how does
religion improve our mental health what
we end up with is essentially five
factors right so there's a trusted safe
space which seems to be very very
important and from uh studies of
psychotherapy we sort of discover that
this is a key part of like
positive mental health outcomes
we also need an organizing framework so
whether it's dbt or cbt or psychodynamic
therapy or psychoanalysis it doesn't
really matter whether it's a hindu
worldview or the christian worldview or
whatever you just need a worldview that
is internally consistent and can handle
whatever life throws at you
the other big thing about religion is
it's a major source of social capital
and community which has very positive
effects on mental health
the last two things these are a little
bit more kind of my opinion there's less
research to suggest this but based on
what i've seen you know sublimation of
the ego is a big common theme amongst
religions which leads to positive mental
health outcomes it's not necessarily
that you need to
go to religion to do these things but
that seems to be a big part of it based
on my study and the last thing is that
it seems to be a pretty systematic way
to discipline the mind which is very
very good for your your mental health
and so if you you know can religion be
good for your mental health absolutely
i think the closer that religions stay
to these five points the more positive
they're going to be for your mental
health can they be bad for your mental
health absolutely right so we can
there's a dark side to sublimating the
ego which is that people may take
advantage of you there's a dark side to
disciplining the mind which is that some
of those practices may border on abusive
or not even border on abusive
there's a dark side to this which is
that you know so community and social
capital can lead to things like shunning
right and ostracization if you start to
like and so suddenly that the community
instead of being a positive impact on
your mental health starts to become a
negative impact and emotionally damaging
to you
and the last thing is that you know
sometimes the therapeutic alliance gets
like taken advantage of and that's
really bad for you
so you don't need religion but it's kind
of the combo meal it's easily packaged
and you don't have to really worry about
it but you can by all means develop
these things on your own
but it's just going to be harder right
because it's not like packaged for you
so
that's religion and mental health
you